docs/source/index.rst, before:

.. brdata-rag-tools documentation main file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Thu Dec  7 18:15:58 2023.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

.. highlight:: python

Welcome to brdata-rag-tools's documentation!
============================================

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: Contents:

Tutorial
========

Hello to the brdata-rag-tools tutorial. In this brief introduction I will show you how to use the library with a brief example.

Installation
------------

Since the package is hosted on the test instance of pypi, you need to pass the index-url parameter to pip:

.. code-block:: bash

   python3 -m pip install --index-url https://test.pypi.org/simple/ --no-deps brdata-rag-tools

We install the package without dependencies since most of the dependencies are not hosted on the test instance of pypi. You may want to install it with the requirements.txt file from the github repository: https://github.com/br-data/rag-tools-library/blob/develop/docs/requirements.txt

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install -r https://raw.githubusercontent.com/br-data/rag-tools-library/develop/docs/requirements.txt

Basic Usage
-----------

First we choose which LLM we want to use by initiating the LLM class with a value from the LLMName enum.

All LLMs from brdata-rag-tools are connected via an API. The library serves as a wrapper to make the models more easily accessible.

.. code-block:: python

   from brdata_rag_tools.models import LLM, LLMName

   llm = LLM(model_name=LLMName.GPT35TURBO)

In this example we chose the GPT 3.5 Turbo model, but different flavours of GPT 3 and 4 are available, as well as the fine tuned on german text model IGEL and Google's Bison models.

All GPT models may be used by anyone with an API token, the IGEL and Bison Model is only accessible from BR Data's infrastructure.

Next we set the environment with OpenAI's access token:

.. code-block:: python
   os.environ["OPENAI_TOKEN"] = "YOUR TOKEN HERE"

For IGEL set the env var "IGEL_TOKEN" or "GOOGLE_TOKEN" for the Bison model respectively.

The LLM class holds merely the token and the actual model class.

The model class holds the actual logic and connections to interact with the language model endpoints.

Now we already can interact with the model via the prompt method:

.. code-block:: python

   joke = llm.prompt("Please tell me a joke.")
   print(joke)

Chat with the model
-------------------

Models of the GPT Family also support chat functionality – this means that models are aware of prompts sent earlier to
the model. You may invoke chat functionality by the chat method.

.. code-block:: python

   answer = llm.chat("Please return 'test')
   print(answer)
   answer = llm.chat("What did I tell you in the last message?")
   print(answer)

If you want to start a new chat and make the model forget what you've told it in earlier messages, you can start a new
chat with the `new_chat` method.

.. code-block:: python

   llm.new_chat()
   answer = llm.chat("What did I tell you in the last message?")
   print(answer)

Augmenting your prompt
----------------------

We do not only want to talk to our LLM, we want to augment it's prompt. This means we want to query a database for relevant content.

This is done using so called semantic, or vector, search. For semantic search the searchable content is transformed into a numerical representation, a vector embedding.

To retrieve relevant content, the user's prompt is also transformed into a vector. The prompt-vector is then compared to all vectors in the database and the most similar vectors are retrieved.

This vector based search needs specialized database types. Brdata-rag-tools currently supports only PGVector databases. The easiest way to run it, if you're not on the BR data infrastructure is to run it via docker:

.. code-block:: bash

   docker run -p 5432:5432 arkane/pgvector

Follow the instructions to set a password or trust all hosts.

If you're on the BR data infrastructure, simply add pgvector as database type to your project's config.yaml file and forward port 5432 to localhost.

Once you have your instance of pgvector running instance the PGVector class and supply it with the database's password.

.. code-block:: python

   from brdata_rag_tools.databases import PGVector
   database = PGVector(password="PASSWORD")

To search for relevant content, you first need to ingest it in the database.

Therefore you need a table in the database to ingest your data. You get a bare minimum of such a table with the following method:

.. code-block:: python

   embeding_table = database.create_abstract_embedding_table()

This method returns an abstract Database Table. Those table always contain the following Columns:

- id (string)
- embedding (Vector)
- embedding_source (string)

The embedding column will be generated by the Database from the content in embedding_source. The id needs to be unique for each row.

To actually use it, you need to inherit from the abstract table. In the following example, we will use our little search for podcast recommendations.

The table needs to know which kind of embedding you want to use. The most universal embedding type is Sentence Transformers, which is fine tuned for cosine similarity comparison of German texts.

.. code-block:: python

   from brdata_rag_tools.embeddings import EmbeddingType

   embedding = EmbeddingType.SENTENCE_TRANSFORMERS

   embeding_table = database.create_abstract_embedding_table(embed_type=embedding)

The returned abstract table is an SQLAlchemy table object. You may add your own Columns to it to store data additional to the three beforementioned items.

.. code-block:: python

   class Podcast(embedding_table):
       __tablename__ = "podcast"
       title: Mapped[str] = mapped_column(String)
       url: Mapped[str] = mapped_column(String)

Give the table any name you like using the __tablename__ attribute. This is the only necessary field. Other columns, like title and url in the example above, are introduced using the SQLAlchemy logic.

For more information on this topic, please refer to the `SQLAlchemy Tutorial <https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/20/tutorial/metadata.html#declaring-mapped-classes>`_. A list of types to use in your mapped_column attributes is available `here <https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/20/core/type_basics.html#generic-camelcase-types>`_.

Now that we have made our Podcast Table class, we can actually fill it with content:

.. code-block:: python

   podcast1 = Podcast(title="TRUE CRIME - Under Suspicion",
                      id="1",
                      url="example.com",
                      embedding_source="Who is rightfully, who is wrongly suspected here? What if people are wrongly convicted, and no one believes them? Or vice versa: If the true perpetrator goes unpunished? Under Suspicion - In the 7th season of the successful BAYERN 3 True Crime Podcast, defense attorney Dr. Alexander Stevens and BAYERN 3 host Jacqueline Belle discuss new exciting criminal cases. This time, it's about people who have come under suspicion. Who is guilty? Who is lying, who is telling the truth? And in the end, are the right ones always convicted?")

   podcast2 = Podcast(title="SCHOENHOLTZ - The Orchestra Podcast",
                      id="2",
                      url="br24.de",
                      embedding_source="How does an orchestra work? How do you get in? And why do orchestra musicians always wear black? Who could answer these questions better than an orchestra musician herself! Anne Schoenholtz is a violinist in the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra, BRSO - an orchestra that has just been voted the third best in the world. As the host of the orchestra podcast, Anne takes us behind the scenes of the BRSO and elicits intimate confessions and funny stories from her colleagues about orchestra life. In the third season, we find out how concert programs are created, what ails musicians typically, and why there are so many jokes about violas. Sir Simon Rattle, the new chief conductor of the BRSO, answers community questions at the end of each episode.")

   podcast3 = Podcast(title="Crime Scene History – True Crime meets History",
                      id="3",
                      url="bla.com",
                      embedding_source="In Crime Scene History, Niklas Fischer and Hannes Liebrandt, two historians from Ludwig Maximilian University in Munich, leave the lecture hall and travel back to exciting crimes from the past: a mysterious water corpse in the Berlin Landwehr Canal, young Stalin as the leader of a bloody robbery, or the hunt for a war criminal halfway around the world. True crime from history discussed in an entertaining way. The focus is on the question of what this actually has to do with us today. Crime Scene History is a podcast from Bayern 2 in collaboration with the Georg von Vollmar Academy.")


Since we ware using SQLAlchemy's Table classes, those tables are the exact representation of what will be stored in our database and we will interact only through those Table classes with the content from the vector store.

Right now, we only have content in our tables and no embedding so far. The embedding is automatically computed when you send your table to the database:

.. code-block:: python

   database.write_rows([podcast1, podcast2, podcast3])

Remember the following line:

.. code-block:: python

   embedding_table = database.create_abstract_embedding_table(embed_type=embedding)

Here we've specified the embedding type for the Table. The embeddings are now created from the type we've specified in this line and sent to the vector store. Now we can query the database for content. Via the `database.session()` attribute we may also interact with it as a normal database via SQLAlchemy.

.. code-block:: python

   with database.session() as session:
       response = session.execute(text("SELECT * from podcast;")).all()

   for row in response:
       print(row.title)

This statement now prints out all of the three podcasts in the database. Just alike you can write your custom SQL queries to filter your results.

To select only those podcasts hosted on br24.de, you would write

.. code-block:: python

   with database.session() as session:
       response = session.execute(text("SELECT * from podcasts where url = 'br24.de';")).all()

   for row in response:
       print(row.title)

Alternatively you may use the sqlalchemy ORM syntax to query the database:

.. code-block:: python

   from sqlalchemy import select

   with database.session() as session:
       response = session.execute(select(Podcast).where(Podcast.url == 'br24.de')).all()

   for row in response:
       print(row.title)

Finding similar results
-----------------------

But conventional queries are not the strength of vector databases. We want to find content similar to a user query to
augment our prompts to the LLM with.

Therefore we query the database with a question, using the `retrieve_similar_content` method.
To find us some podcasts on music, we simply ask for them:

.. code-block:: python

   context = database.retrieve_similar_content("Please show me some podcasts on music.",
                                               table=Podcast,
                                               embedding_type=embedding.SENTENCE_TRANSFORMERS)


The returned context object is a list of dictionaries, with the table name as key for the context and the key `cosine_dist`
which indicates the distance of the search term's vector and the the content's vector.

The smaller `cosine_dist` is, the more similar are query and result.

.. code-block:: python

   for row in context:
       print(row["cosine_dist"], row["Podcast"].title)

Augmenting your prompt
----------------------

Now we may augment our prompt to the LLM. Therefore we need to write a prompt template:

.. code-block:: python

   prompt_template = ("You are the podcast expert at Bayerischer Rundfunk. "
                      "A user asks you the following question:\n"
                      "{}\n"
                      "Here are some podcasts that you can recommend:\n"
                      "-{}\n"
                      "Limit yourself to the selection of podcasts and do not invent new ones. Recommend only one podcast from the list and briefly justify your decision. "
                      "Write in the second person, addressing the user directly.")


In the template we see two placeholders: One for the user question. If we develop an app, this would be the prompt given
to us by the user. For now, we just write it ourselves:

.. code-block:: python

   user_prompt = "Please recommend me some podcasts on music."

The second placeholder is for the context we retrieved from our database. We just need to restrucutre it as a human
readable list.

.. code-block:: python

    context = [x["Podcast"].title + ": " + x["Podcast"].embedding_source for x in context]

Then we put everything together using a python format string and send it to the LLM:

.. code-block:: python

    prompt = prompt_template.format(user_prompt, "\n-".join(context))
    response = language_model.prompt(prompt)

    print(response)

LLM usually only have a limited amount of tokens you may pass to them. If you run your RAG applicatoin on the server,
there is a little helper function to make sure you don't exceed the token limit. You pass it your template and the user
prompt as a string and the context as a list of strings.

If the context is too long, the function will pop the last elements of your context until it fits the context window.

.. code-block:: python

    context = language_model.model.fit_to_context_window(prompt_template + user_prompt, context)

Simply use this function before you pass the context to the LLM.

Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`


Models
======

.. automodule:: models
   :members:

Databases
=========

Databases are vector databases for similarity search. Right now, only PGVector databases are supported.

.. automodule:: databases
   :members:

Embeddings
==========

.. automodule:: embeddings
   :members:

Commit message:

:bulb: :bug: Add create tables statement to tutorial.

docs/source/index.rst, after:

.. brdata-rag-tools documentation main file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Thu Dec  7 18:15:58 2023.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

.. highlight:: python

Welcome to brdata-rag-tools's documentation!
============================================

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: Contents:

Tutorial
========

Hello to the brdata-rag-tools tutorial. In this brief introduction I will show you how to use the library with a brief example.

Installation
------------

Since the package is hosted on the test instance of pypi, you need to pass the index-url parameter to pip:

.. code-block:: bash

   python3 -m pip install --index-url https://test.pypi.org/simple/ --no-deps brdata-rag-tools

We install the package without dependencies since most of the dependencies are not hosted on the test instance of pypi. You may want to install it with the requirements.txt file from the github repository: https://github.com/br-data/rag-tools-library/blob/develop/docs/requirements.txt

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install -r https://raw.githubusercontent.com/br-data/rag-tools-library/develop/docs/requirements.txt

Basic Usage
-----------

First we choose which LLM we want to use by initiating the LLM class with a value from the LLMConfig enum.

All LLMs from brdata-rag-tools are connected via an API. The library serves as a wrapper to make the models more easily accessible.

.. code-block:: python

   from brdata_rag_tools.models import LLM, LLMConfig

   llm = LLM(model_name=LLMConfig.GPT35TURBO)

In this example we chose the GPT 3.5 Turbo model, but different flavours of GPT 3 and 4 are available, as well as the fine tuned on german text model IGEL and Google's Bison models.

All GPT models may be used by anyone with an API token, the IGEL and Bison Model is only accessible from BR Data's infrastructure.

Next we set the environment with OpenAI's access token:

.. code-block:: python

   os.environ["OPENAI_TOKEN"] = "YOUR TOKEN HERE"

For IGEL set the env var "IGEL_TOKEN" or "GOOGLE_TOKEN" for the Bison model respectively.

The LLM class holds merely the token and the actual model class.

The model class holds the actual logic and connections to interact with the language model endpoints.

Now we already can interact with the model via the prompt method:

.. code-block:: python

   joke = llm.prompt("Please tell me a joke.")
   print(joke)

Chat with the model
-------------------

Models of the GPT Family also support chat functionality – this means that models are aware of prompts sent earlier to
the model. You may invoke chat functionality by the chat method.

.. code-block:: python

   answer = llm.chat("Please return 'test')
   print(answer)
   answer = llm.chat("What did I tell you in the last message?")
   print(answer)

If you want to start a new chat and make the model forget what you've told it in earlier messages, you can start a new
chat with the `new_chat` method.

.. code-block:: python

   llm.new_chat()
   answer = llm.chat("What did I tell you in the last message?")
   print(answer)

Augmenting your prompt
----------------------

We do not only want to talk to our LLM, we want to augment it's prompt. This means we want to query a database for relevant content.

This is done using so called semantic, or vector, search. For semantic search the searchable content is transformed into a numerical representation, a vector embedding.

To retrieve relevant content, the user's prompt is also transformed into a vector. The prompt-vector is then compared to all vectors in the database and the most similar vectors are retrieved.

This vector based search needs specialized database types. Brdata-rag-tools currently supports only PGVector databases. The easiest way to run it, if you're not on the BR data infrastructure is to run it via docker:

.. code-block:: bash

   docker run -p 5432:5432 arkane/pgvector

Follow the instructions to set a password or trust all hosts.

If you're on the BR data infrastructure, simply add pgvector as database type to your project's config.yaml file and forward port 5432 to localhost.

Once you have your instance of pgvector running instance the PGVector class and supply it with the database's password.

.. code-block:: python

   from brdata_rag_tools.databases import PGVector
   database = PGVector(password="PASSWORD")

To search for relevant content, you first need to ingest it in the database.

Therefore you need a table in the database to ingest your data. You get a bare minimum of such a table with the following method:

.. code-block:: python

   embeding_table = database.create_abstract_embedding_table()

This method returns an abstract Database Table. Those table always contain the following Columns:

- id (string)
- embedding (Vector)
- embedding_source (string)

The embedding column will be generated by the Database from the content in embedding_source. The id needs to be unique for each row.

To actually use it, you need to inherit from the abstract table. In the following example, we will use our little search for podcast recommendations.

The table needs to know which kind of embedding you want to use. The most universal embedding type is Sentence Transformers, which is fine tuned for cosine similarity comparison of German texts.

.. code-block:: python

   from brdata_rag_tools.embeddings import EmbeddingType

   embedding = EmbeddingType.SENTENCE_TRANSFORMERS

   embeding_table = database.create_abstract_embedding_table(embed_type=embedding)

The returned abstract table is an SQLAlchemy table object. You may add your own Columns to it to store data additional to the three beforementioned items.

.. code-block:: python

   class Podcast(embedding_table):
       __tablename__ = "podcast"
       title: Mapped[str] = mapped_column(String)
       url: Mapped[str] = mapped_column(String)

Give the table any name you like using the __tablename__ attribute. This is the only necessary field. Other columns, like title and url in the example above, are introduced using the SQLAlchemy logic.

For more information on this topic, please refer to the `SQLAlchemy Tutorial <https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/20/tutorial/metadata.html#declaring-mapped-classes>`_. A list of types to use in your mapped_column attributes is available `here <https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/20/core/type_basics.html#generic-camelcase-types>`_.

Next, create the tables in the database:

.. code-block:: python

   database.create_tables()

Now that we have made our Podcast Table class, we can actually fill it with content:

.. code-block:: python

   podcast1 = Podcast(title="TRUE CRIME - Under Suspicion",
                      id="1",
                      url="example.com",
                      embedding_source="Who is rightfully, who is wrongly suspected here? What if people are wrongly convicted, and no one believes them? Or vice versa: If the true perpetrator goes unpunished? Under Suspicion - In the 7th season of the successful BAYERN 3 True Crime Podcast, defense attorney Dr. Alexander Stevens and BAYERN 3 host Jacqueline Belle discuss new exciting criminal cases. This time, it's about people who have come under suspicion. Who is guilty? Who is lying, who is telling the truth? And in the end, are the right ones always convicted?")

   podcast2 = Podcast(title="SCHOENHOLTZ - The Orchestra Podcast",
                      id="2",
                      url="br24.de",
                      embedding_source="How does an orchestra work? How do you get in? And why do orchestra musicians always wear black? Who could answer these questions better than an orchestra musician herself! Anne Schoenholtz is a violinist in the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra, BRSO - an orchestra that has just been voted the third best in the world. As the host of the orchestra podcast, Anne takes us behind the scenes of the BRSO and elicits intimate confessions and funny stories from her colleagues about orchestra life. In the third season, we find out how concert programs are created, what ails musicians typically, and why there are so many jokes about violas. Sir Simon Rattle, the new chief conductor of the BRSO, answers community questions at the end of each episode.")

   podcast3 = Podcast(title="Crime Scene History – True Crime meets History",
                      id="3",
                      url="bla.com",
                      embedding_source="In Crime Scene History, Niklas Fischer and Hannes Liebrandt, two historians from Ludwig Maximilian University in Munich, leave the lecture hall and travel back to exciting crimes from the past: a mysterious water corpse in the Berlin Landwehr Canal, young Stalin as the leader of a bloody robbery, or the hunt for a war criminal halfway around the world. True crime from history discussed in an entertaining way. The focus is on the question of what this actually has to do with us today. Crime Scene History is a podcast from Bayern 2 in collaboration with the Georg von Vollmar Academy.")


Since we ware using SQLAlchemy's Table classes, those tables are the exact representation of what will be stored in our database and we will interact only through those Table classes with the content from the vector store.

Right now, we only have content in our tables and no embedding so far. The embedding is automatically computed when you send your table to the database:

.. code-block:: python

   database.write_rows([podcast1, podcast2, podcast3])

Remember the following line:

.. code-block:: python

   embedding_table = database.create_abstract_embedding_table(embed_type=embedding)

Here we've specified the embedding type for the Table. The embeddings are now created from the type we've specified in this line and sent to the vector store. Now we can query the database for content. Via the `database.session()` attribute we may also interact with it as a normal database via SQLAlchemy.

.. code-block:: python

   with database.session() as session:
       response = session.execute(text("SELECT * from podcast;")).all()

   for row in response:
       print(row.title)

This statement now prints out all of the three podcasts in the database. Just alike you can write your custom SQL queries to filter your results.

To select only those podcasts hosted on br24.de, you would write

.. code-block:: python

   with database.session() as session:
       response = session.execute(text("SELECT * from podcasts where url = 'br24.de';")).all()

   for row in response:
       print(row.title)

Alternatively you may use the sqlalchemy ORM syntax to query the database:

.. code-block:: python

   from sqlalchemy import select

   with database.session() as session:
       response = session.execute(select(Podcast).where(Podcast.url == 'br24.de')).all()

   for row in response:
       print(row.title)

Finding similar results
-----------------------

But conventional queries are not the strength of vector databases. We want to find content similar to a user query to
augment our prompts to the LLM with.

Therefore we query the database with a question, using the `retrieve_similar_content` method.
To find us some podcasts on music, we simply ask for them:

.. code-block:: python

   context = database.retrieve_similar_content("Please show me some podcasts on music.",
                                               table=Podcast,
                                               embedding_type=embedding.SENTENCE_TRANSFORMERS)


The returned context object is a list of dictionaries, with the table name as key for the context and the key `cosine_dist`
which indicates the distance of the search term's vector and the the content's vector.

The smaller `cosine_dist` is, the more similar are query and result.

.. code-block:: python

   for row in context:
       print(row["cosine_dist"], row["Podcast"].title)

Adding context to your prompt
-----------------------------

Now we may augment our prompt to the LLM. Therefore we need to write a prompt template:

.. code-block:: python

   prompt_template = ("You are the podcast expert at Bayerischer Rundfunk. "
                      "A user asks you the following question:\n"
                      "{}\n"
                      "Here are some podcasts that you can recommend:\n"
                      "-{}\n"
                      "Limit yourself to the selection of podcasts and do not invent new ones. Recommend only one podcast from the list and briefly justify your decision. "
                      "Write in the second person, addressing the user directly.")


In the template we see two placeholders: One for the user question. If we develop an app, this would be the prompt given
to us by the user. For now, we just write it ourselves:

.. code-block:: python

   user_prompt = "Please recommend me some podcasts on music."

The second placeholder is for the context we retrieved from our database. We just need to restrucutre it as a human
readable list.

.. code-block:: python

    context = [x["Podcast"].title + ": " + x["Podcast"].embedding_source for x in context]

Then we put everything together using a python format string and send it to the LLM:

.. code-block:: python

    prompt = prompt_template.format(user_prompt, "\n-".join(context))
    response = language_model.prompt(prompt)

    print(response)

LLM usually only have a limited amount of tokens you may pass to them. If you run your RAG applicatoin on the server,
there is a little helper function to make sure you don't exceed the token limit. You pass it your template and the user
prompt as a string and the context as a list of strings.

If the context is too long, the function will pop the last elements of your context until it fits the context window.

.. code-block:: python

    context = language_model.model.fit_to_context_window(prompt_template + user_prompt, context)

Simply use this function before you pass the context to the LLM.

Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`


Models
======

.. automodule:: models
   :members:

Databases
=========

Databases are vector databases for similarity search. Right now, only PGVector databases are supported.

.. automodule:: databases
   :members:

Embeddings
==========

.. automodule:: embeddings
   :members:
